Sadhana Chidambaran

Question 1: Briefly comment on the trends you see in the gut microbiota throughout the first week.

Initially, there are two major phyla of bacteria present in the gut: Actinobacteria (mostly the Cutibacterium avidum species), 
and Firmicutes (mostly Enterococcus faecelis). Over time, Firmicutes dominates the gut microbiome, with the two most abundant species 
being Enterococcus faecelis and Staphylococcus epidermidis.

Question 2: What metrics in the contigs can we use to group them together?

Contigs can be grouped when their sequences dovetail, i.e. there is strong overlap between them. Instead of looking for long 
exact matches, contigs can be grouped by matching k-mers. If enough continuous k-mers overlap, the contigs can be said to be 
in the same group. This will make it easier to account for any potential gaps or nucleotide substitutions that may be in 
individual contigs.

Question 3:
(A) How many bins did you get?

MetaBAT grouped the contigs into six bins.

(B) Roughly what percentage of the assembly do they represent?

These bins represent about 45% of the assembly.

Bases in assembly.fasta: 38708237
grep -v ">" week13_data/assembly.fasta | wc -c

Bases in all bins: 17365118
grep -v ">" metabat/*.fa | wc -c

(C) Do you think the sizes of each bin look about right, based on what you know about the size of prokaryotic genomes?

Bacterial genomes are typically a few million base pairs long. The genomes binned here have about 1.5 - 3 million base pairs, 
which is small enough to be accurate for bacteria.

(D) How would you estimate how complete and how contaminated each bin is?

The 16s rRNA gene is often used to classify bacteria into different groups; bacteria with similar genes are said to belong to 
the same operational taxonomic unit (OTU). If other unique genes are identified for a particular bacterial species, they can 
be used to identify specific genomes. For example, if a gene unique to species X is found in a bin predominantly identified as 
the species Y genome, the Y genome can be said to be contaminated with X. If, on the other hand, the unique X gene is not found 
within the X genome, the X genome could be incomplete.

Question 4:
(A) What are your predictions for each bin?

Bin 1 - Staphylococcus haemolyticus
Bin 2 - Leuconostoc citreum 
Bin 3 - Staphylococcus lugdunensis
Bin 4 - Enterococcus faecalis
Bin 5 - Cutibacterium avidum
Bin 6 - Staphylococcus epidermidis
Bin 7 - Staphylococcus aureus
Bin 8 - Anaerococcus prevotii

(B) This approach to classification is fast, but not very quantitative. Propose one method to more robustly infer the taxonomy 
of a metagenomic bin.

This classification method does not actually look at the nucleotide composition of the bins compared to the assembly. Doing 
such a comparison could strengthen the argument that a bin represents a specific species. The bin sequence could also be compared 
directly to other species in the genus, as they probably all evolved from the same ancestor. Comparing the bin sequence to species 
outside the genus could confirm this, by showing greater genetic differences.

Question 5: Compare the results of the individual genome abundance analysis to the conclusions you derived from looking at the 
read taxonomy distributions (from Step 1). Do they agree with each other? What is different?

Enterococcus faecelis is the most abundant species at each time point, which corresponds to the initial conclusions made 
in Step 1. The abundance of Staphylococcus epidermidis also increases over time as previously stated, while the abundance of 
Cutibacterium avidum decreases. The individual genome abundance analysis provides a more detailed picture, however; 
it is easier to see the dynamics of species that are overall less abundant. Anaerococcus prevotti is shown here to be more 
abundant at earlier time points, which was not picked up in the analysis from Step 1.
